---
title: "Dante's Hell and Salvation in Castlevania"
date: '2023-12-11T00:00:00.000'
excerpt:
  'In Castlevania, director Warren Ellis incorporates direct references,
  contrapasso, iconographic inversion, and models of redemption from Dante’s
  Divine Comedy.'
tags: ['writing', 'projects']
thumbnail: /img/posts/dante-castlevania/thumbnail.jpeg
---

**Warning**: this post contains _Castlevania_ spoilers!

I wrote this paper for ITAL 262, Dante's Divine Comedy, taught by the wonderful
Professor Beatrice Arduini at the University of Washington. You can also find
this paper as an
[entry on Manifold here](https://uw.manifoldapp.org/read/castlevania/section/6340db47-8050-46d0-8a79-337087fdbda9).
I had a blast writing this paper since it basically gave me an excuse to binge
watch a show in the middle of the quarter!

## Dante’s Hell and Salvation in _Castlevania_

by Bella Lee

### Introduction and background

Who doesn’t love a good TV show with magic and monsters?

_Castlevania_ is an animated TV series based on a Japanese video game franchise
of the same name. It is set in Wallachia, a region in modern-day Romania, and
centered around the vampire Dracula’s wrath. After the Church persecutes his
wife, Lisa, for being a witch, he terrorizes cities with his army of night
creatures to eliminate all humans from the region. The religious imagery,
corruption of the Church, and beings from Hell create a dark, tense, and
infernal atmosphere. The show follows a classic fantasy plotline of a hero’s
journey, but imbues it with elements of Dante, from its tone to its
presentation. **In _Castlevania_, director Warren Ellis incorporates direct
references, contrapasso, iconographic inversion, and models of redemption from
Dante’s _Divine Comedy_.**

Each season of _Castlevania_ builds on previous seasons’ plotlines. Season 1
establishes the backstories of the main cast: Trevor Belmont, Sypha Belnades,
and Alucard. The protagonist, Trevor Belmont, is the last descendant of an
excommunicated family of monster hunters. Though he is cynical, he is also
naturally righteous. On his journey, he meets Sypha Belnades, a magician from a
traveling caravan, and Alucard, Dracula and Lisa’s son. The three form an
alliance to stop Dracula’s rampage. In season 2, they slay Dracula amid a
vampire society power struggle. The second season also introduces the human
Devil Forgemasters Hector and Isaac, who resurrect corpses by implanting souls
from hell within them. They are loyal followers of Dracula; after his death,
they must fight their own battles and find their purpose. Season 3 is the climax
of the series and follows four plotlines surrounding these five characters to
establish the foundation for Dracula’s return from Hell. Season 4 concludes the
four storylines with character redemption and Dracula’s resurrection.

### Direct references

The show references the _Divine Comedy_ through its episode titles and depiction
of Hell in season three. Throughout the season, Trevor and Sypha solve a
supernatural mystery in a small village’s priory, Hector is captured and
tormented by a rival vampire faction in Styria, Isaac seeks to amass an undead
army to take over Styria and take revenge on Hector for betraying Dracula, and
Alucard trains two young vampire hunters who seek his guidance. In the
end, Trevor and Sypha fail to save the village and witness the corrupted Church
using the souls of the inhabitants to open the gates of Hell, Hector is enslaved
and exploited, Isaac summons a colossal undead army from Hell, and Alucard’s two
students betray and attempt to kill him. The title for season 3 episode 10,
“Abandon All Hope,” references the inscription “ABANDON ALL HOPE YOU WHO ENTER
HERE” on the gates of Hell and mirrors the characters’ entrance into a state of
living Hell (_Inferno_ 3.9).

<p id="gdcalert1" ><span style="color: red; font-weight: bold">>>>>>  gd2md-html alert: inline image link here (to images/image1.png). Store image on your image server and adjust path/filename/extension if necessary. </span><br>(<a href="#">Back to top</a>)(<a href="#gdcalert2">Next alert</a>)<br><span style="color: red; font-weight: bold">>>>>> </span></p>

![Hell in Castlevania](/img/posts/dante-castlevania/1.jpeg)

Fig. 1. Hell in Castlevania; Ellis, Warren, director; “The Harvest”;
Castlevania, season 3, episode 9, 2020;
[https://castlevania.fandom.com/wiki/Hell\_(animated_series)](<https://castlevania.fandom.com/wiki/Hell_(animated_series)>)

Season 3 also features an overview of Hell that mirrors Dante’s conception of
its topography in _Inferno_. The portrayal features a barren landscape, rivers
of blood, souls entangled in trees (see fig. 1), ditches, people encased in ice,
and settlements that reflect Dante’s use of Hell’s structure as an allegory for
society. Ellis derives these depictions from the overall landscape of Inferno
and the punishments for murderers in _Inferno_ Canto 12, spoilers and suicides
in Canto 13, the fraudulent beginning in Canto 18, and traitors beginning in
Canto 31.

### Contrapasso and iconographic inversion

Besides direct references, Ellis creatively incorporates _Inferno_’s contrapasso
and iconographic inversion. The first notable instance occurs in season 1
episode 4, where a priest who sows discord faces is ripped apart by a crowd.
After Trevor calls him out for encouraging the persecution of Sypha’s nomadic
family, a mob rips him apart with swords and pitchforks, mirroring the
punishment for schismatics in _Inferno_ Canto 28.

In addition to punishments straight from Dante, Ellis introduces novel penalties
fitting the show’s supernatural tone. In season 4, Hector triumphs over his
captors and reverses the power dynamics. Lenore, Hector’s vampire captor (and
now, his prisoner), decides to commit suicide instead of spending the rest of
her life enslaved. She says, “[Power] becomes a parasite you have to feed. Power
does nothing but eat." Hector replies, “Like a vampire” (Ellis, “It’s Been”
3:17). Because vampires originate from mortals’ thirst for power and
immortality, their slow, eternal punishment is to constantly be thirsty for
blood, for conquest, and for more — they can never be satiated, and they cannot
adapt to changes in power. After recognizing this, Lenore liberates herself by
perishing in the sun.

Ellis also perverts Dante’s inspiration for love through iconographic inversion.
For Dante, love is “the spiritual union of the soul and the beloved object”
(Mazzeo 148–149). Since Divine Love is central to the _Divine Comedy_, Dracula’s
motives introduce a twisted take on this theme. For him, if there is no love,
there can only be death. Though the main characters vanquish him in season 2,
the central plotline for seasons 3 and 4 involves his resurrection. In multiple
scenes, he embraces his wife, Lisa, in a dilapidated house in Hell. The
antagonists aim to revive the two souls as one in the form of a Rebis, a
hermaphroditic creature hailed to be the ultimate alchemical creation. His soul
is indeed united with his beloved, but in a painful, unstable form against his
own will, thus demonstrating an ironic inversion of his driving motivation,
love. Ellis’ play on this concept pays homage to Dante’s creative punishments in
_Inferno_ by incorporating the poet’s philosophical exploration into the show.

### Redemption

In contrast to gruesome punishments, Ellis also includes the _Divine Comedy_’s
themes of redemption in Dracula’s, Trevor’s, and Isaac’s character arcs.
Dracula’s and Trevor’s salvation follow the example of Dante and Beatrice, while
Isaac’s character journey mirrors Dante’s in _Inferno_ and _Purgatorio_ and uses
Islam to contrast the central Christian theme of the show. Season 1 of
_Castlevania_ opens with Lisa and Dracula’s first meeting. Initially, Dracula
shuns humanity, viewing it as livestock. However, after meeting Lisa, he is
“redeemed” and grows to support his wife’s goal of healing and providing. Lisa’s
introduction as a figure of Divine Good transforms him from a monster to a man.
After he loses her, he once again strays “from the straight and true” and copes
by committing genocide (_Inferno_, 1.3). Lisa’s role mirrors Beatrice’s, as she
brings Dracula to happiness and “beautifies” his life, much like Beatrice does
for Dante in _Paradiso_. Dracula’s character arc demonstrates an alternate
progression of Dante’s redemption story, where the lady as an embodiment of
light departs before redemption is complete, leading to corruption and despair.

Sypha’s role in Trevor’s character development mirrors Beatrice and Dante more
completely. At the beginning of the series, Trevor is a drunk with no purpose in
life but to wander from town to town and sleep under trees. However, after
defeating Dracula with Sypha and Alucard, he realizes his mission. In season 2
episode 8, when Sypha tries to convince Trevor to travel with her, she says,
“You're better than you were when I met you. Do you know why I think that is?
It's because you're doing what you were born for” (Ellis, “End Times” 13:23). He
has returned to his path on “the straight and true” with the help of Sypha, his
female guide as the embodiment of light (_Inferno_ 1.3). The series ends with
Trevor defeating Death itself, disappearing for two weeks, and returning a
renewed person, thus completing his path of redemption. His character arc
mirrors Dante’s incorporation of Aristotle’s telos in the _Comedy_ and the
narrative of constant ascent, uplifted by Love and a holy woman figure
(Alighieri and Esolen xiv).

Rather than redemption through external guidance, Isaac instead redeems himself
through an introspective journey mirroring Dante’s realizations in _Inferno_ and
_Purgatorio_. Isaac is a character who follows “a mystical form of Islam,”
Sufism, and whose backstory is colored by betrayal from his former master and
his fellow Forgemaster Hector (Specia). He initially aligns himself with
Dracula’s cause because he despises humanity and only believes in God. At the
end of season 2, Dracula saves his life by casting him into a desert in Tunis,
yet this act of kindness stings of abandonment due to his past trauma. Despite
being cast aside, he still feels a strong sense of loyalty. Hence, he aims to
take Styria to enact revenge on Hector, the traitor. Throughout season 3, he
journeys across the desert and embarks on a voyage to Europe, accumulating an
undead army along the way. As he travels, he witnesses the suffering and
kindness of others and realizes that human nature is not as black-and-white as
he believes it to be. Though he does not have a fixed mentor, he encounters many
figures along the way that drastically change his outlook on humanity. His
journey and encounters renew his faith in his Divine mission to act as the right
hand of God.

This time, he aims not to cull humanity, but to liberate all beings from Hell.
At the climax of season 3 episode 9, he conquers a corrupted magician’s tower
and converts the magician’s human slaves into night creatures. In a conversation
with Flyseyes, a night creature who was a philosopher before being sentenced to
eternal damnation, Isaac references the prophet Muhammed and presents an
unconventional view of salvation according to Muslim beliefs. He says, "One day,
hell will be emptied and its doors will rattle in the wind. . . . Through my
hand, God lifts the damned from hell in his mercy to enact their penance on the
Earth as my soldiers. . . . Should their penance on Earth be eternal too?"
(Ellis, “Walk Away” 5:40). The invocation of Muslim beliefs is reminiscent of
Mohammed’s dramatic declaration in _Inferno_ Canto 28. However, in Dante’s epic,
Mohammed’s beliefs are portrayed as a cause for division within the Christian
Church, whereas in _Castlevania_, Isaac’s unorthodox Muslim beliefs create
dramatic tension and separate him from the Christian cast.

Throughout the four seasons, Isaac transforms from a vengeful individual to
someone seeking to lead the damned to Salvation. At the culmination of his
journey, by fighting his way up the magician’s tower circle by circle in a
personal Purgatory, he achieves salvation by cleansing his distrust in humanity
and establishing his philosophy of God’s will. He leaves behind his sins and
remembers his purpose. His redemption mirrors Dante's drinking from the River
Lethe and River Eunoe at the end of _Purgatorio_. He emerges renewed and ready
to proceed to the next realm; in Isaac’s case, this means conquering the Styrian
vampire stronghold and reigning as king. He ascends from servant to master, from
lost to divine, in his purgatorial journey across the continent and up the
magician’s tower.

### Conclusion

Upon close inspection, _Castlevania_ is full of Dante references. Though they
may not all be direct incorporations, they demonstrate how impactful Dante’s
work is on modern literary tropes and canon. Iteration and adaptation keep
classical literature alive in our contemporary collective consciousness.

##

## Works Cited

- Abrahamov, Binyamin. "MISZELLEN" _Der Islam_, vol. 79, no. 1, 2002, pp.
  87-146. https://doi.org/10.1515/islm.2002.79.1.87.
- Alighieri, Dante. Inferno. Edited by Anthony Esolen, translated by Anthony
  Esolen, Random House Publishing Group, 2002.
- Ellis, Warren, director. “Abandon All Hope.” _Castlevania_, season 3, episode
  10, 2020.
- Ellis, Warren, director. “End Times.” _Castlevania_, season 2, episode
  8, 2018.
- Ellis, Warren, director. “It's Been a Strange Ride.” _Castlevania_, season 4,
  episode 10, 2021.
- Ellis, Warren, director. “Monument.” _Castlevania_, season 1, episode 4, 2017.
- Ellis, Warren, director. “The Good Dream.” _Castlevania_, season 3, episode
  6, 2020.
- Ellis, Warren, director. “The Harvest.” _Castlevania_, season 3, episode
  9, 2020.
- Ellis, Warren, director. “Walk Away.” _Castlevania_, season 4, episode
  3, 2021.
- Mazzeo, Joseph Anthony. “Dante’s Conception of Love.” Journal of the History
  of Ideas, vol. 18, no. 2, 1957, pp. 147–60. JSTOR,
  https://doi.org/10.2307/2707621. Accessed 18 Nov. 2023.
- Specia, Megan. “Who Are Sufi Muslims and Why Do Some Extremists Hate Them?
  (Published 2017).” The New York Times, 24 November 2017,
  https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/24/world/middleeast/sufi-muslim-explainer.html.
  Accessed 19 November 2023.
