---
title: 'Two-Faced: Duality and Jung’s Psychoanalysis'
date: '2020-11-01T00:00:00.000'
excerpt:
  "How do the Jungian ideas of the persona, ego, and shadow emerge in the
  novellas Demian: The Story of Emil Sinclair's Youth by Herman Hesse and The
  Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde by Robert Louis Stevenson?"
tags: ['writing']
thumbnail: /img/posts/extended-essay/1.jpeg
---

This is an essay that I wrote during my junior and senior years of high school.
Though there are many things I would add to it now, I still remember it fondly
because the research process created a pivotal moment in my life. I encountered
philosophy and themes that changed my worldview, and I finally began to enjoy
literature again after a rough transition period where I couldn’t seem to find
anything good once I outgrew middle-grade fiction. Without Demian and Dr. Jekyll
and Mr. Hyde, I wouldn’t have opened the doors to live in the literature and
ideas I enjoy now.

## Introduction

While Demian: The Story of Emil Sinclair’s Youth by Hermann Hesse is a
bildungsroman following the spiritual growth of Emil Sinclair and Strange Case
of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde by Robert Louis Stevenson explores the mystery of Dr.
Jekyll’s reclusion, both works explore the duality of human nature and the
disparities between two sides of an individual’s personality, “good” and “evil”.
Carl Jung defined these components of the personality as the persona and the
shadow, with the ego at the center. Murray Stein compiles and analyzes most of
Carl Jung’s essays in his book, Jung’s Map of the Soul. As an expert on
psychoanalysis, he provides a comprehensive explanation of Jung’s works. The ego
is the center of consciousness, which is the foundation of one’s identity and
makes every individual unique and complex. The persona is the mask that the ego
wears when confronting the world and presents different characteristics
depending on the individual’s role in the context of their society and those
around them; in other words, “Character is situational” (Stein 111). Behind all
is the shadow which the ego casts, and is generally “quite unaware” of, with all
the traits an individual unconsciously suppresses “because of cognitive or
emotional dissonance” (Stein 106). “Persona and shadow are usually more or less
exact opposites of one another, and yet they are as close as twins”, and they
both develop and evolve based on the ego’s attitude and perception (Stein 109).
There may be bias present in Stein’s interpretation, as his analysis contains
opinions and interpretations that counter Jung’s critics. In the introduction of
his book, he acknowledges that he is presenting “presenting a map” of “Jung’s
map of the soul” (Stein 3). He states that though Jung is “frequently criticized
for being inconsistent and contradictory”, he “actually produced a coherent
psychological theory” (Stein 7). Stein aims to reveal the “underlying unity of
vision” despite the “gaps and inconsistencies” that “do exist” (Stein 8).

Hesse was quite familiar with these Jungian concepts, as he was in contact with
“one of Carl Jung’s former students”, and his understanding of psychoanalysis
had a large influence on his works (Rockefeller). And while Stevenson may not
have actively utilized these concepts in his writing, he was highly influenced
by the concept of duality that was prominent in his own life, from his childhood
experiences to constant migration in his adulthood (Livesey). These perspectives
manifest themselves in their works with parallels in the character development
of both Sinclair and Dr. Jekyll. Additionally, these parallels are also seen
between the works and both authors’ lives and reveal insight into how they view
the duality of man. Demian: The Story of Emil Sinclair’s Youth was published in
1919 and set in Germany before WWI, with the novella ending as the war starts.
Throughout the novella, Sinclair struggles with the two sides of him that seem
to be clearly divided, his good and evil worlds. It is a bildungsroman narrated
by the protagonist, Emil Sinclair. The fluctuation between persona and shadow
during his journey of self-discovery adds to the complexity of his character.
Ultimately, Sinclair becomes his own spiritual guide as he learns to accept all
aspects of his personality.

Rather than a journey of spiritual growth, Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr.
Hyde, published in 1856, is a mystery set in 1800s London. The story is narrated
by his lawyer friend Mr. Utterson, Dr. Lanyon, and himself through a combination
of description and letters. Hyde, a cruel individual who commits heinous crimes,
is Jekyll’s alter-ego, the separation of his shadow from the rest of his
consciousness. Eventually, Jekyll begins to transform involuntarily and
ultimately commits suicide to be free from the dissonance within himself. He is
no longer able to keep up his persona and is not ready to reveal his shameful
shadow to the world; he cannot accept his shadow as his new identity.

Sinclair reaches “wholeness” by learning to accept both parts of himself, while
Henry Jekyll ultimately reaches his demise by trying to completely separate his
two opposing expressions of himself. The two texts demonstrate clear
distinctions between the protagonists’ persona, ego, and shadow, yet,
ultimately, the characters approach them in completely different manners, with
their contrasting attitudes making for a compelling comparative investigation.
This leads to the question, “How do the Jungian ideas of the persona, ego, and
shadow emerge in the novellas Demian: The Story of Emil Sinclair's Youth by
Herman Hesse and The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde by Robert Louis
Stevenson?” Jung’s psychoanalytic concepts emerge differently in both works, and
the characters’ perceptions of them greatly influence their fates.

## Character Foundations

In Hesse’s Demian, Sinclair’s description and attitude towards his two worlds
illustrate the foundation of the internal conflict between his persona, ego, and
shadow. To Sinclair, his childhood consisted of two worlds where “From two poles
came forth day and night” (Hesse 4). His world of good “comprised only [his]
parents” and was filled with “clarity and cleanliness” while everything else
consisted of “monstrous, tempting, terrible, enigmatical goings-on” (Hesse 4,
5). Sinclair’s two worlds serve as an extended metaphor for his persona and
shadow, and his tone and diction when describing his two worlds reflect his
early perceptions of his personality. He identifies more with his brighter world
and gravitates towards the impression of his parents, while he finds his dark
world, or his shadow, “monstrous” and “terrible”, opting to shy away from it.
Ironically, though he views his shadow negatively, he also describes it as
“tempting”, demonstrating that he has had a curiosity about all aspects of his
personality from a young age. Though Sinclair has an inclination towards good
and warmth, he puts on a persona of delinquency to fit into an unfamiliar social
situation. To appeal to and be accepted by the menacing bully Franz Kromer, he
spins an elaborate lie about stealing a sack of apples. However, this ploy
backfires as Kromer threatens to tell the owner of the orchard. Because his
identity is centered around his association with his good world, and he has
never put on a persona that conflicted with his values, his facade of rebellion
creates internal dissonance. As he faces the downward spiral of his lies, he
says that his “life was ruined”, and even considers committing suicide(Hesse
16). Sinclair draws a clear line between his ego and shadow, as he holds the
strong belief that everything within the shadow is wrong. Yet, as he becomes
increasingly aware of it, he feels that “it was an ugly and repugnant feeling”
which at the same time “had a certain charm” (Hesse 19). The paradoxical “charm”
of the “ugly and repugnant” traits of his shadow creates an internal conflict
that again reveals his innate curiosity and becomes a catalyst for his future
personal growth and exploration.

The disparities between Dr. Jekyll’s persona, ego, and shadow in Strange Case of
Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, contrarily, are expressed as externally as they are
internally through the separation of his two alter-egos. He devises a method to
completely separate his persona and shadow into two individuals, Jekyll and
Hyde, who are hyperbolic representations of his divided personality. Jekyll is a
well-mannered, eloquent, and highly respected doctor who had “but every mark of
capacity and kindness”, while Mr. Hyde exuded a “haunting sense of unexpressed
deformity” (Stevenson 13, 18). Stevenson creates a clear juxtaposition between
the two alter-egos by painting Jekyll as a kind-hearted, warm, and intelligent
individual, while he describes Hyde as menacing and feral, using words such as
“snarled aloud” to describe his actions, yet still possessing the intelligence
and ingenuity of Jekyll (Stevenson 10). Like Sinclair in his childhood, Jekyll
sees a clear distinction between good and evil, his persona and shadow. Although
he wishes to restrain and rid himself of Hyde, he is not completely repulsed by
him. He had already been aware of Hyde’s traits before the separation, as in his
memoir letter, he admits that he “concealed [his] pleasures” to the point where
he became “committed to a profound duplicity of” himself. Rather than being
curious like Sinclair, he wishes to indulge in the traits of his shadow and does
not fear them. He merely creates the alter-ego to mask his “morbid sense of
shame” that his “pleasures” brought (Stevenson 44). With his transformation
serum, Jekyll allows his shadow to become the persona of a new body — which he
refers to as his “disguise” — allowing him to commit atrocious acts without
guilt. He is protected by the “strange immunities of [his] position” as a
renowned doctor while he hides his sins behind his new persona (Stevenson 47).
He does not shy away from his shadow as Demian does, but instead relies on
physical transformation to unleash his sinister side, which would be frowned
upon if harnessed by his original body with his prestigious status.

Both characters struggle with their shadows, which manifest differently. While
Sinclair’s persona and shadow are “two worlds [bordering] each other”, Dr.
Jekyll creates a distinct separation from Mr. Hyde through physical
transformation (Hesse 6). The control that Sinclair’s shadow has over him waxes
and wanes as he experiences different phases in his life. As he transitions to
adulthood, he once again belongs “entirely to the dark world” as he indulges in
alcohol. During his period of “debauchery”, he becomes “a leader and a star”,
indicating that his shadow has infiltrated and bled into his persona. His ego
views his transgressions not only as sins but also as a means of obtaining
validation from his peers. Because of his change in perspective, his shadow and
persona traits switch. He embraces his transgressions and appears proud and
influential to his peers as his thoughts drift towards negativity and reckless
behavior, yet he feels “pitiful” and “self-destroying”; during this period, his
shadow becomes his persona, while his persona becomes his shadow (Hesse 91). His
classmates see him as “the devil of a good fellow, as a cursed witty and
spirited drinking companion,” also recognizing that his shadow, or “the devil”
has taken over his persona, “a good fellow” (Hesse 91). His new
shadow-influenced persona and the values of his original persona completely
juxtapose each other, and he even acknowledges his peers’ recognition of the
change. Because the novella is narrated through a first-person perspective, the
audience is exposed to his inner dialogue and, therefore, can see both sides of
him, his new persona and his ego. His perspective may also skew the way he
perceives his peers’ view of him as “the devil” with his own perception of
himself. He again experiences mental dissonance as his actions contradict his
values, his world of good, but returns to expressing himself with his original
persona as he experiences inner growth and maturity. Ultimately, he becomes
closer to realizing the effects of his ego’s perspective on the unconscious
manifestation of his persona and shadow.

Though the shadow is a portion of the personality that the “ego cannot control”,
Jekyll tries his best to completely separate it from himself to create a
righteous personality without sin (Stein 106). However, though they are referred
to as different individuals, Jekyll and Hyde are one, merely taking on different
appearances. Jekyll switches his persona and his shadow just as Sinclair did in
his period of regression, but Jekyll can interchange them at will and appears to
be in full control of the presentation of his personality through his
transformation serum. However, later on, he begins to involuntarily transform
into Hyde. As a portion of the personality that one would generally not pay
attention to and even deny the existence of, his shadow is initially “much less
exercised”, so Hyde was “much smaller, slighter and younger than Henry Jekyll,”
demonstrating its weakness and ease to control (Stevenson 46). Yet, as he
continues to indulge in his sins, his shadow is “much exercised and nourished”,
which causes Hyde to grow "in stature”, granting him more power within Jekyll’s
psyche (Stevenson 49). Jekyll’s transformation serum allows him to actively
exercise his shadow and increase its strength. Rather than following the natural
cycle of internal conflict and growth as Demian does, Jekyll completely removes
the need for mental dissonance by isolating the unideal aspects of his
personality, which proves to be detrimental to his personal growth. For
Sinclair, the lines between his persona and shadow are blurred, while Jekyll
attempts to draw a clear distinction between them to allow room for indulgence
without guilt. Sinclair ultimately controls his darker urges while Jekyll
succumbs to them completely. Sinclair acknowledges and accepts his two
counterparts, while Jekyll does his best to hide his shadow from the public eye,
preferring only to present his carefully sculpted persona and refusing to be
vulnerable to the world. By attempting to control what the “ego cannot control”,
Jekyll disrupts his inner world and stunts his personal growth.

## Dealing with Disparities

Sinclair and Jekyll both face the manifestation of their shadows with great
perturbation but choose to deal with them in different manners. During his
period of tavern going, Sinclair’s contradictory thoughts and actions lead his
“anxious soul” to be “full of apprehension”, in his mind “weeping bitterly at
the thought of [his] past life, of [his] mother, of God”, juxtaposing his
projected image as a “cursed witty and spirited drinking companion” (Hesse 91,
92). Sinclair’s alarm is consistent with his values, as his panic sets in when
his persona begins to reflect delinquency and stray away from his true thoughts.
His thoughts of his “mother” in his darkest times are symbolic of his unwavering
values despite his evolving personality. By maintaining his idea of his “good”
world, he maintains his conscience and feels the need to repent and be forgiven
for his actions. Throughout the novella, Sinclair is in touch with his inner
world and his unconscious, often pondering his actions and mental state deeply.
His ironic internal conflicts caused by his changing persona and shadow
demonstrate that he is a reflective character and considers the consequences of
his actions and emerging traits of his personality. Similarly, after
involuntarily transforming into Hyde, Jekyll feels as if “terror woke up in
[his] breast as sudden and startling as the crash of cymbals”, demonstrating the
uncertainty and anxiety that comes with the involuntary emergence of his shadow
(Stevenson 49). However, unlike Sinclair, the disparities between his actions
and beliefs never bothered him, as he used Hyde as a scapegoat for his
depravity, stating that “It was Hyde, after all, and Hyde alone, that was
guilty.” Through his avoidant mindset, “his conscience is slumbered” and he does
not fully recognize the extent of the atrocities that he is committing
(Stevenson 48). He turns a blind eye to the consequences of his actions while
indulging in his shadow’s desires. He only begins to experience alarm when his
existence is threatened by his shadow growing so strong that it begins to engulf
and replace his righteous and pure persona. While Sinclair’s periods of his
shadow emerging occur naturally with the tides of his emotions and experiences
in life, Jekyll artificially induces its appearance in response to his
“aversions to the dryness of a life of study” (Stevenson 47). Rather than
allowing his personality to evolve naturally, he manipulates it for his personal
entertainment, then dissociates from his shadow to avoid internal unrest.
Sinclair grows throughout the bildungsroman because his internal conflicts allow
the perspective of his ego to change, causing his persona and shadow to evolve,
while Jekyll stunts his own growth through avoidance that prevents his mindset
from changing.

Sinclair ultimately deals with his inner conflict by integrating his persona and
shadow. He finds a mysterious note in his book one day during a lecture which
reads, “The bird fights its way out of the egg. The egg is the world. Whoever
will be born must destroy a world. The bird flies to God. The name of the god is
Abraxas” (Hesse 112–113). Abraxas is taught in the lecture as “a divinity on
whom the symbolical task was imposed of uniting the divine and the diabolical,”
a concept naturally attractive to Sinclair as an extended metaphor for his
struggle with the border between his inner good and evil, his two worlds, and
the paradox of their overlapping nature (Hesse 115). Through his
self-exploration and reflection, Sinclair matures and eventually embraces all
aspects of his personality as one whole. Beyond representing the world, the bird
and the egg also symbolize escaping the confines of the dichotomous nature of
the personality. Due to the novella being a bildungsroman written in the
first-person point of view, Sinclair’s growth can be observed through his inner
monologues and the gradual changes in his perception of events. When he was
younger, he found that he ranked “higher than good and pious people” with his
“wickedness and unhappiness” when his shadow was dominant (Hesse 36). Yet as his
shadow appears later in his life, he no longer allows it to engulf him, as he
becomes aware of the effects of his actions, reflecting on his “little
thoughtlessness, crudeness” towards his mentor that became a “judgment” towards
him (Hesse 156). Ultimately, with his maturity and realization that his two
sides, persona and shadow, intertwine, Sinclair looks into “the black mirror to
see [his] own picture, which now completely resembles Him, [his] guide and
friend“; he becomes his own guide by completely understanding his inner world
(Hesse 207). By coming to terms with his two sides and accepting them as one,
Sinclair reaches closure and learns to accept himself for who he is.

Rather than embracing his two alter-egos, the extreme separation eventually
leads to Jekyll’s demise. Unlike Sinclair, Jekyll views the increasing power of
his shadow, and his lack of control over it, as a tragedy and tries to suppress
it to the best of his abilities. After beginning to involuntarily transform into
Hyde without the use of his serum, he spirals out of control and confines
“himself to the cabinet over the laboratory” to prevent his newly-dominant
shadow from taking over his life (Stevenson 25). The forced separation of the
two facets of his personality leads him to fixate on the suppression of his
shadow to the point where it affects both his mental well-being and his daily
life. When his friend, Utterson, questions him about the frequent mention of
Hyde in his will, Jekyll even goes as far as to say, “the moment I choose, I can
be rid of Mr. Hyde”, with his tone indicating that he views Hyde as a completely
separate entity from himself (Stevenson 13). In his letter, he states “that man
is not truly one, but truly two”, which reflects his attitude towards the
warring parts of his personality — in being “truly two”, he implies that he
exists as two separate entities, despite his ego being in control and aware of
both (Stevenson 44). Ironically, he eventually admits in his letter that “even
if [he] could rightly be said to be either” Jekyll or Hyde, “it was only because
[he] was radically both” and constantly refers to himself as “I”, even in the
form of Hyde, in his testament (Stevenson 45). Using his persona as a mask, he
convinces himself and others that he and Mr. Hyde are fundamentally different.
However, deep down, his ego knows that they are the same. He sees his persona,
ego, and shadow as separate entities that clash with each other and are
completely distinct despite coexisting within his mind. He feels as if he is
“slowly losing hold of [his] original and better self, and becoming slowly
incorporated with [his] second and worse,” when, in actuality, the distinction
between them is not black and white (Stevenson 50). His “second and worse” self
refers to his shadow, and he feels that his original persona is being completely
engulfed by it, hence the increasing frequency of involuntary transformations.
As his persona and shadow war with each other, he begins to panic as he loses
his sense of self, his sense of stability, and the identity of his ego. His
physical state is symbolic of his mental corruption. Hyde’s growth “in stature”
and increased frequency of appearance indicates that Jekyll is losing himself
and growing too weak, due to his lack of acceptance towards his diverse
personality, to resist the darker urges of his mind. Though he is still
fundamentally Henry Jekyll, he becomes a version of himself that he never
intended to nurture. The fear caused by the overwhelming power of his shadow
eventually leads to his demise, where he commits suicide upon seemingly
permanent transformation into Hyde.

## Conclusion

The common motif of duality in the two works can be interpreted through the
Jungian ideas of ego, persona, and shadow. In Demian, Sinclair struggles with
the perception of himself, his persona and his shadow, which he visualizes as
his light and dark worlds. He ultimately understands that they inevitably
overlap and integrate all aspects of his personality into one. Similarly, in
Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, Dr. Jekyll also struggles with his good
and evil facets. However, unlike Sinclair, he copes with the disparity by
completely separating his persona and shadow into two individuals with the same
mind, himself and Mr. Hyde. He relies on physical transformation to unleash his
sinister side, which would be frowned upon if harnessed by his original body
with his prestigious status. This separation ultimately leads to his demise as
his shadow becomes dominant, and he commits suicide to be free from the
dissonance within himself.

While their stories take different turns, the fates of the two protagonists
ultimately demonstrate the dangers of shunning parts of oneself, of one’s
personality. In both works, there is a clear distinction between the characters’
persona, ego, and shadow, yet the outcomes are completely different. Sinclair’s
journey reaches a wholesome ending, with him becoming his own spiritual guide by
accepting all portions of his personality and exploring his unconscious. Dr.
Jekyll’s demise is quite ironic: he creates Hyde to separate his persona from
his shadow, yet ultimately becomes completely engulfed by it. An individual’s
persona, ego, and shadow all bleed into each other, weaving together to form the
foundation of the personality. Sinclair grows in understanding of this concept,
while Jekyll notices it belatedly during his downfall. The spiritual growth in
Demian: The Story of Emil Sinclair’s Youth and the dark imagery of The Strange
Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde demonstrates that all portions of the
personality should be accepted, no matter how repulsive, to form a stable
identity. The psyche is full of complexities and dichotomies fundamentally
brought by the many perspectives of the ego, which form the persona and shadow.
Many subconsciously view the shadow as a shameful weakness that should be
eradicated, yet, as demonstrated by the two works, the acceptance and evolution
of the shadow can lead to personal growth and maturity. When considered from a
Jungian lens, the works prompt reflection on the understanding of our inner
thoughts and feelings, our multifaceted personalities.

## Works Cited

- Hesse, Hermann. Demian: The Story of Emil Sinclair's Youth. 1919. Reprint.
  Translated by N. H. Piday. Martino Fine Books, 2011. Print.
- Livesey, Margot. “The Double Life of Robert Louis Stevenson.” The Atlantic,
  The Atlantic, Nov. 1994,
  https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/1994/11/the-double-life-of-robert-louis-stevenson/306474/.
  Accessed 2 Jun. 2020.
- Rockefeller, Lily. “Biography of Hermann Hesse, German Poet and Novelist.”
  ThoughtCo., Dotdash Publishing Family, 26 Nov. 2019,
  https://www.thoughtco.com/biography-of-hermann-hesse-4775337. Accessed 2
  Jun. 2020.
- Stein, Murray. Jung's Map of the Soul. Open Court, 1 Mar. 1998. Kindle
  Edition.
- Stevenson, Robert Louis. The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. 5
  Jan. 1886. Reprint. Amazon Classics, 11 Jul. 2017. Kindle Edition.

## Attributions

Thumbnail photo by [Gülfer
ERGİN](https://unsplash.com/@gulfergin_01?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on
[Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/photos/LUGuCtvlk1Q?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
