---
title: Giiive
date: '2023-03-27T00:00:00.000'
excerpt:
  'For the BU Catalyst Designathon, my team and I created a mobile application
  to tackle the stigma surrounding homeless individuals and educate the user on
  how to give to the community.'
tags: ['projects']
thumbnail: /img/posts/giiive/thumbnail.jpeg
---

![Project thumbnail](/img/posts/giiive/thumbnail.jpeg)
[View project](https://devpost.com/software/giiive)

Giiive placed first in the coexistence track, the track that had the most
submissions, in the 2023 BU Catalyst Designathon. The project was created by a
team of three over the course of two and a half days.

## Brainstorming

Designathon participants were given three tracks to explore: travel, culture,
and coexistence. We found the coexistence track the most interesting. It
reminded me of the World Scholar’s Cup 2019 theme, A World on the Margins. I
learned, debated, and wrote about
[neglected histories](https://www.scholarscup.org/subjects/2019/history/) and
life
[on the edge of society](https://www.scholarscup.org/subjects/2019/social-studies/),
which left a lasting impact on my worldview.

After we decided on our intended track, we brainstormed many problem spaces to
explore. We ended up choosing the relationship between homeless individuals and
passersby.

![Brainstorming](/img/posts/giiive/1.jpeg)

This topic was special to me because of a debate round I competed in for the
2019 World Scholar’s Cup. My team debated whether policymakers should allow
homeless individuals to sleep in schools overnight since they were vacant and
accessible. Growing up in Taiwan, I did not have much exposure to the homeless
population, so doing the research to defend my team’s position helped me
empathize with the situation and realize there were many people out there who
did not think and experience the world as I did. This experience had me viewing
social issues with more gravity, and I must thank this debate experience for
helping me be able to empathize with different perspectives.

## Problem Space

As students living in a densely-populated city, we coexist with people from many
walks of life, including those experiencing homelessness. This issue is
especially prevalent near the University of Washington campus, and we pass by
many homeless individuals in our daily routines. As our team comes from
backgrounds with little exposure to such experiences, we had to educate
ourselves on the housing crisis as we assimilated into the culture here. We, and
many of our friends, would help them if we could, but we lack the means to do so
without risking personal safety. And, without hearing their stories, it is hard
to break free from our biases and cultural stereotypes.

## Stakeholder Engagement

After deciding on our problem space, we concluded the first day of the
designathon by conducting a stakeholder survey. We recognize that the
participants were selected by convenience sampling and only represent one small
stakeholder group, but we had no other choice due to the time constraints and
scope of the project.

![Survey](/img/posts/giiive/2.jpeg)

According to user research survey responses from 12 participants, stigma is the
primary barrier that prevents them from diving beyond a surface-level interest
and understanding of the situation. Many also expressed that they would be
willing to give to the homeless community if appropriate resources were
accessible and readily available. Therefore, we decided to design a mobile
application aimed at reducing stigma and educating the user.

We did some research to create user personas. Though we began with a demographic
most similar to ours, we were able to expand our views and address our personal
biases in the process of researching our two main stakeholder groups.

![Personas](/img/posts/giiive/3.jpeg)

## Proof of Concept Prototype

During our design process, we focused on goals rather than features, using “the
leap” focus points to structure our decisions. We decided that the metric we
wanted to move was the user’s open-mindedness and philanthropy, while we wanted
users to feel educated and compassionate after the designed experience.

![Feature brainstorming](/img/posts/giiive/4.jpeg)

After settling on our goals, we designed the user flow, then the prototype
itself.

![User flow](/img/posts/giiive/5.jpeg)

- [View Figma prototype](https://www.figma.com/proto/DgWWNKuQbQdncNsy4CyFWQ/Catalyst-2023?node-id=15-762&scaling=scale-down&page-id=15%3A711&starting-point-node-id=15%3A738)
- [View Figma wireframes](https://www.figma.com/file/DgWWNKuQbQdncNsy4CyFWQ/Catalyst-2023?type=design&node-id=15-711&mode=design&t=mTXDodOBHyyCZCvG-0)

_Giiive_ aims to solve the problem by encouraging passersby to connect and
empathize with their local homeless population by hearing their individual
stories. By presenting the community through a human-centered approach rather
than statistics, we aim to reduce stigma and encourage the user to engage with
an accessible solution. Though we acknowledge that donations are short-term
solutions, we hope that, by providing small starting steps, we can pique the
user’s interest in contributing to long-term, systemic change. To aid them in
their journey, we provide links to additional educational resources. We hope
users will walk away from the experience feeling educated, compassionate, and
open-minded.

## Limitations

Our app is targeted towards college students and young adults who have access to
mobile phones and internet service. This main stakeholder was chosen out of
convenience due to the time limit.

We understand that some homeless individuals may not readily have access to
these resources, hence we intend to connect them with our service through
various local organizations. However, there is a possibility that their stories
may be misrepresented, and they will have no control over this. Additionally, we
must ensure that the privacy of the individuals behind the stories is well
protected, as they do not have the luxury of stable, private residences.

## Conclusion

I participated in this designathon with less design experience than I would have
liked. However, my teammates were amazing and helped me grow through this
project. I learned a lot about the design process through working with them, and
began to fall in love with the human-centered design process. This experience
taught me what it is like to work with a talented and passionate team, and I
look forward to doing it again many times in the future.

## Attributions

Project created with Annie Pao and Stephanie Chou for the BU Catalyst 2023
Designathon.
