---
title: Itemize
date: '2023-06-05T00:00:00.000'
excerpt:
  'For INFO 360: Design Methods, my team and I created a fridge inventory
  application based on the design space of shared kitchen spaces.'
tags: ['projects']
thumbnail: '/img/posts/itemize/8.png'
---

If you don't want to read this whole document (I understand, I wouldn't want to
read it, either), take a look at the Figma prototypes instead ;) As they say, a
picture is worth a thousand words. But if you are curious about the design
process, then read ahead! And check out the bonus speculative design at the
bottom of the page, that's the part that I had the most fun with and that I'm
the proudest of.

- [View full prototype on Figma](https://www.figma.com/file/qj58wsghp3HXvIusWeLToH/Itemize-Prototype?type=design&node-id=0%3A1&mode=design&t=lnfQMEHuu0r89djc-1)
- [Interactive flows on Figma](https://www.figma.com/proto/qj58wsghp3HXvIusWeLToH/Itemize-Prototype?type=design&node-id=36-125&t=lnfQMEHuu0r89djc-0&scaling=scale-down&page-id=0%3A1&starting-point-node-id=36%3A125&show-proto-sidebar=1)

## Problem Space

A kitchen is an area that is used to prepare food (“Kitchen Definition”). Though
it can exist in other contexts, such as in restaurants, this exploration focuses
on it in the context of living spaces shared between more than one individual.
German architect Gottfried Semper views architecture through an anthropological
perspective and defines it as consisting of four elements — the hearth, the
roof, the platform, and the walls. The hearth is a space for fire, and, by
extension, cooking, gathering, and eating. It is “the first sign of human
settlement” around which the remaining elements of architecture were born
(101–102). In other words, the hearth, which has evolved into the modern
kitchen, is the center of domestic life and has social origins. Cooking, the
process of using heat to transform the physical properties of food, falls within
the broader activity of food preparation, the process of rendering food edible.
Though eating is a basic biological need, the act of preparing food can serve as
a form of social bonding. Aristotle defined it as a “menial art”, indicating
that at one point in history, it was viewed as a chore requiring little skill.
This is also a view that many carry today. The act of preparing food is
associated with “the household and daily routine”, so it is typically viewed as
insignificant, and its social value is not prioritized. Despite being
overlooked, the act of food preparation is crucial in revealing social relations
both in society and within households (Graff 1–6, Paay 276–278).

## Stakeholder Engagement

### Key Stakeholders

Preparing food in shared spaces requires high levels of communication between
core stakeholders. As all members of a domestic household — whether family
members, roommates, guests, or other relations — must eat, they all are invested
in and affected by the preparation of food in the kitchen. They must coordinate
how food is stored, prepared, and consumed, as well as decide what food supplies
to replenish, when to do so, and who is in charge of doing so. Tertiary
stakeholders such as food media producers and interior designers are not as
invested or affected but have a strong influence over how food is produced and
how people interact in and with the kitchen space. Some key stakeholder groups
include media producers, interior designers, head of household, food preparers,
and food consumers, as shown in below.
![Stakeholder map](/img/posts/itemize/1.png)

### Contexual Interviews

For our contextual inquiries, we focused on the specific stakeholder group of
“food preparers”, as we felt that they had the most interactions with the
physical space itself. We interviewed five college students living with
roommates, as these were the stakeholders that we had ready access to. In some
interviews, “food consumers” (i.e. roommates, friends) were present, and we
included them in the process, too, as they help illustrate the candid, daily use
of a shared kitchen space. By observing these areas, we were able to better
understand how the participants collaborated, communicated, and prepared food
with those who share their space.

## Intervention

![System diagram](/img/posts/itemize/2.jpg)
[View full system diagram on Figma](https://www.figma.com/file/LPXmihEgPWQY4mfdhBaadD/Food-in-Shared-Spaces%3A-System-Diagram?type=whiteboard&node-id=0-1&t=8TP1NvQFCkqfSR9Q-0)

Though the process of preparing food in shared spaces is a complex undertaking,
we decided to simplify it at a macro level to identify and represent the
potential leverage points more clearly.

For some, preparing food can be a social activity (Graff 1–6). As people
interact in the kitchen by changing their physical position in the space, there
is potential for streamlining the process through technological interventions to
better "connect, converse, coordinate, cooperate and cook" (Paay). It would be
preferred if individuals who are cooking could move through the space fluidly
and document what they learned from the collaborative experience. The design
space that we chose is the management of the shared kitchen space. With the goal
of improving communication between housemates and overall experience in mind,
our design concepts aim to combat issues such as scheduling conflicts and
distribution of space.

We considered the below points of intervention based on the contextual inquiry
conducted with our participants in their shared kitchen space. We noted that
many of her struggles involved portion control, efficient use of space, and
sharing food items. As we observed, we noticed that many of these pain points
were solved with the help of her housemates.

### Leverage Points

Potential points of intervention that we identified include:

1. Counting or recalling portions available in the fridge

Why: Our contextual inquiry participant spent a significant amount of time
standing in front of the refrigerator assessing what ingredients she had and how
much of them were present.

2. The process of extrapolating from past experience to determine portions

Why: Our participants adjusted portion sizes on the fly to feed the people
within their domestic space on that given day. However, in the end, there was
not enough food to satisfy everybody.

3. The separation of belongings and food items based on dietary restrictions
   such as allergies

Why: Our participant mentioned a roommate with severe allergies who separated
her kitchen utensils from the rest of the household. She is very meticulous
about this separation, as any mistake could result in severe consequences.
Additionally, another stakeholder stated that her roommates separated their
belongings as well due to differences in dietary preferences — she eats meat,
while her roommates are vegan.

4. Not enough counter space due to the presence of too many people’s belongings

Why: Our participant kept dropping food and moving objects around because of the
limited counter space available in the shared kitchen space.

5. Forgetting things and having to go back and forth between locations within
   the space to retrieve them

Why: Our participant’s cooking time was significantly lengthened by inefficiency
in this department. She kept going back and forth between cutting, retrieving,
and washing food items because she did not plan everything out beforehand.

6. Facilitating collaboration in shared kitchen spaces

Why: We noticed this was something that occurred regularly within shared kitchen
spaces, even if collaborators were not actively participating in the cooking
process. Therefore, it may be beneficial to consider how this process could be
made more enjoyable and rewarding for the stakeholders involved.

To determine these leverage points, we referred to our previous contextual
inquiry and conducted informal interviews with additional stakeholders to gain
more perspectives. With our intervention, we hope to improve the collaborative
aspect of the shared kitchen environment through experimentation of
communication means. Rather than implement physical products that would interact
with and obstruct the kitchen space itself, we opted for a subservient approach
through the use of technology. By observing the ways in which we can improve
communication within the shared kitchen space, we also wanted to provide a way
to make progress visual and commemorative (Factor, 2020). The main goals we have
for our intervention are improving communication between housemates, improving
the management of inventory, and promoting better health habits.

### Design Concepts

#### Housemate Fridge Inventory

![Storyboard for potential use](/img/posts/itemize/3.png)

This intervention pinpoints “Counting or recalling portions available in the
fridge” as a leverage point. It will allow housemates — or people who share
kitchen spaces in general — to view the items available in their fridges at a
glance. This would save them the hassle of counting and assessing every time
they need to cook, and can also help outside of the kitchen space, such as when
grocery shopping. This intervention changes the system by making the process of
retrieving food from the fridge, communicating between stakeholders, and
managing food supplies smoother.

The storyboard above depicts a stakeholder who wants to make something from a
recipe but is not sure if they have the ingredients needed (eggs) in the fridge.
Rather than rummaging through the fridge to see if they do have eggs, they
instead check the inventory application. They discover that they do not have
eggs, but do have bread. Therefore, they make toast instead of eggs.

Though the leverage point may be considered a small inconvenience, we chose it
because we noticed that it would, in our contextual inquiry participant’s case,
save a lot of time and effort. The storyboard simplifies the situation, but
there could be cases where the desired ingredient requires some rummaging to get
to. We also personally find checking the fridge a point of high friction that
sometimes causes me to not cook at all when we are feeling tired from other
things in life. we chose the form of a mobile app because it is portable and
data is easily shareable, which makes it easy for housemates to update
information in real-time and check what food they have at home while on the go.

#### Portion Sizing

![Application sample](/img/posts/itemize/4.jpg)

This intervention focuses on the leverage point of extrapolating portions.
Determining portion size is dependent on the cooking experience of the
individual and their recollection of past cooking experiences. The main problem
is that determining portion sizes when cooking for multiple individuals can pose
a challenge when trying a new recipe or if the individual is new to the cooking
experience. This intervention aims to determine portion sizing for multiple
individuals, as well as provide a means of communication between housemates.

The application sample demonstrates the application providing an alternative
means of communication between housemates while also providing recommended
portion sizes. The application first takes user input for the specific dish,
which can be inputted by the user or imported via URL. If the recipe is
user-inputted, they will need to provide the ingredients required and the number
of portions the dish produces (for the first time only). The application will
then save to a user’s profile and create a digital cookbook. After the dish is
selected, the user’s profile will then share the dish being prepared with the
other housemates. The housemates are then able to vote if they would like to
consume the dish and the application will adjust the ingredient portions
accordingly.

One of the biggest challenges for us when cooking is determining portion sizes
and without a recommended portion size, we often find ourselves overeating. In
addition to portion sizes, the additional cookbook feature assists users when
determining what to cook. We often go to the grocery store with no set plan for
a meal and it’s not until we see certain ingredients that inspire me to make a
dish. By having this reference that is easily accessible, we anticipate that it
would assist in the amount of time spent at the grocery store and eliminate the
indecisiveness that’s associated with choosing a dish.

#### Cooking Collaboration

![Application sample](/img/posts/itemize/5.png)

The above illustration gives a rough idea of what the application can do.
Everyone living in a household or who shares a kitchen will have this app on
their phone and take the spot if they need to cook. If someone else is cooking
just for themselves, they have the option to let one join them or decline them.
If someone else is cooking for this entire group, one can request to join that
working person and pick a position to help. There are many different ways for a
group of people to prepare food together and save time as a whole: in
particular, one can do all the cleaning work for the dishes, one can cut out all
the vegetables and fruits, one can prepare the raw meat, and the last one being
the book. With this application, we think it will be a lot easier for everyone
to play a role during the making of their food and drastically reduce their
workload, time wasted, and energy & water used.

#### Final Choice

We decided to go with the first design concept that focuses on the intervention
of recalling portions within the fridge. We ultimately landed on this choice due
to this intervention point being one of the foundational decisions within our
system diagram. Through our contextual inquiry, we observed that our
participants along with their household members, also faced a similar struggle
when recalling ingredients and determining what to cook. Although similar
applications exist such as Cookpad and SuperCook, these often don’t account for
portion sizing and are limited to in-app recipes.

## Proof of Concept Prototype

- [View full prototype on Figma](https://www.figma.com/file/qj58wsghp3HXvIusWeLToH/Itemize-Prototype?type=design&node-id=0%3A1&mode=design&t=lnfQMEHuu0r89djc-1)
- [Interactive flows on Figma](https://www.figma.com/proto/qj58wsghp3HXvIusWeLToH/Itemize-Prototype?type=design&node-id=36-125&t=lnfQMEHuu0r89djc-0&scaling=scale-down&page-id=0%3A1&starting-point-node-id=36%3A125&show-proto-sidebar=1)

### Prototyping Process

![Low fidelity wireframes](/img/posts/itemize/7.png)

In our low fidelity wireframes, we decided to make five screens: login, the home
page, add item, edit item, and view item details. Like our logo, we decided to
create a minimalistic user interface and rounded edges to match the aesthetic of
our logo. Through our first round of wireframes, we found that the ‘view item
details’ page seemed a bit redundant and quite similar to the add pages and edit
item pages.

![High fidelity wireframes](/img/posts/itemize/8.png)

The name ‘Itemize’ came up in one of our wireframing discussions. It accurately
describes the cataloging of fridge items and organizes them in a way that
maximizes space within a shared environment. Our high-fidelity prototype
features a colored version of our low-fidelity wireframes in a way that is
user-friendly. It is a semi-functional interactive prototype that details the
scenarios of various functions. The “Add Item” function depicts the process of
adding a new item to the user’s inventory. The user can choose to name the item,
quantity, category, owner, and expiration date. We found this function to be a
bit lengthy and so we incorporated a “Quick Edit” function to allow the user to
change the quantity of a given item without having to go through the add item
screen. The last function we implemented was the ability to change the owner of
a given item. Again, we wanted the process to be efficient so that the user
could perform this function from the “Current Inventory” page. To execute this
function, the user can simply select the owner under the given item, which will
display a dropdown list with all the previous owners, a shared option, and the
option to add a new owner. We ultimately decided to focus on the three most
essential functions that would make our application efficient while maintaining
simplicity.

### Branding

![Initial color palette](/img/posts/itemize/9.png)

When making a food-related application, we noticed that a good majority of food
application logos contained vibrant primary colors. With this in mind, we came
up with a preliminary color palette that featured the three primary colors as
well as green. While experimenting with black and white as potential text
colors, we found that both had approximately the same readability with this
specific color palette.

![Logo explorations](/img/posts/itemize/10.png)

We wanted to incorporate some elements of the fridge into our logo since it’s an
app that primarily focuses on fridge inventory and storage. In the first draft,
our logo (left) took the literal interpretation of a fridge and made the
appliance into a monochrome minimalistic design. At first, we liked the idea of
using green as our primary color since it would make our app distinguishable
from others. However, after careful consideration, we ultimately decided against
the green color due to its similarity to other mobile non-food related
applications such as messages and phone logos. In the second iteration of our
logo (center), we decided to focus more on the storage and inventory concept. It
features a three-tiered shelf, similar to that of a fridge and an apple to
convey that this was a food-related application.

Following modern design trends, we decided to make some small modifications to
the second iteration of our logo (right). We rounded the corners of the shelves
and edges of the application to give a more appealing look and a comforting
feel. In addition to the shelves, we added an orange to give the logo a
symmetrical balance. Lastly, we slightly altered the color of the shelves from
the wireframing gray color to an off-white.

![Final color palette](/img/posts/itemize/11.png)

After determining the blue background color of our logo, we decided to build a
color palette based on the colors that would complement each other. We used the
website coolors.co to begin generating randomized color palettes and color
palettes with the addition of our blue primary color. Taking inspiration from
the two palettes generated, we then altered the colors until we landed on our
final color palette. It features two text colors (gray, white), a monochrome
scale of the original blue, and a stoplight set of colors as accents (red,
yellow, green).

## Evaluation

We elected to evaluate our intervention using usability testing and surveys.
These methods are appropriate for thoroughly testing the look and feel, as well
as the potential implementation, of a mobile application. Usability testing will
allow us to delve deeper into our app’s navigation and information architecture
issues, while surveys will allow us to prioritize features and better align our
goals with stakeholder needs.

Since we are focusing on the dynamics of the shared kitchen space, we recruited
college students to participate in our evaluation, as many either live at home
with their families or live in shared spaces with roommates. We first sent out
surveys through connections and social media for impressions on our intervention
from a broader perspective. While we do understand that this is a form of
convenience sampling, the act of sharing a kitchen space with others is one that
everyone has experienced at some point in their lifetime. The survey introduces
the design and proof of concept prototype to the respondent, then gauges how
useful they deem the features to be. While we were gathering survey responses,
we conducted usability tests both online and in person to maximize accessibility
for participants.

### Survey

We received 35 responses to our survey. None of the respondents usually keep a
list of items in their kitchen. 74.1% of respondents would use the app, 11.4%
would not, and 14.5% would “maybe” or conditionally use it.

The questions we asked were:

1. Do you usually keep a list of what food items you have in your kitchen? (Yes
   / No / Other)
2. Would you incorporate this application into your daily life? (Yes / No /
   Other)
3. If yes, how would you see yourself interacting with it? If no, why not?
   (Open)
4. On a scale of one to seven, how likely would you be to reference this
   application while cooking? (1–7)
5. On a scale from one to seven, how likely would you be to reference this
   application while grocery shopping? (1–7)
6. On a scale of one to seven, how useful would it be to be able to see the
   quantity of each item in your fridge through the app? (1–7)
7. On a scale of one to seven, how useful would it be to be able to see which
   items are available in your fridge through the app? (1–7)
8. On a scale of one to seven, how useful would it be to be able to see who owns
   each item in your fridge through the app? (1–7)

Those who responded “No” or “Maybe” shared the sentiment that they would be
unable to keep up with using the app due to the energy and effort required to
manually input data — one respondent states that “methods usually don't last
long just because they're not convenient enough and take extra mental effort to
remember doing”. However, another says “If there’s a device that detects what
foods are in the fridge that connects to the app then I’ll use it,” which is
helpful in pointing us in a direction for future iterations.

One respondent brings up the point that if they “needed to know what was in the
fridge, [they] could just open it”. One respondent answered enthusiastically,
stating that they “would definitely use this app to its fullest extent”. Another
respondent expresses the opinion that “it matters less who owns what items, but
more [that] it’s easy to check with what shared items are low so they can be
replenished“, which is useful for pivoting the focus of our intervention.

Most respondents indicated that they would be extremely likely to reference the
application while grocery shopping and less likely to while cooking. The feature
that is perceived to be most useful is being able to view items and their
quantities in the fridge, while opinions on the feature to see who owns each
item were mixed.

### Usability Testing

We collected the time taken to complete each task, measured in seconds, and the
accuracy with which each task is completed, measured in the number of errors. We
also recorded the screen during interviews to document how participants
interacted with the application.

Since the sample size is small due to the project's scope, we cannot expect
these figures to be statistically significant enough to conduct a formal,
quantitative analysis, but they will be useful in informing us of our
intervention’s success.

![Usability testing results](/img/posts/itemize/6.png)

## Iterations

After receiving feedback from the INFO 360 instructor team, we revised our
prototype to make the navigation more accessible for thumb reach, changed the
colors of the quantity icons to be less chaotic, and made the expiration dates
more understandable at a glance.

Since the feature with the highest average difficulty level was the “change
owner” feature, we realized that it was a bit overcomplicated. Usability test
participant 2’s response that it would be nice to request owner changes through
the app indicates to us that our solution made simple communication more
complicated than it should be. We used the survey response that said, “it
matters less who owns what items, but more [that] it’s easy to check with what
shared items are low so they can be replenished“ as a reference point for
simplifying the process. This also allowed us to simplify the process of adding
items, which participants said would be tedious if they had to do it for every
item they purchased.

![Final iteration of high-fidelity prototype](/img/posts/itemize/12.png)

Above is the final iteration for our application.

## Requirements and Specifications

Our application requires the stakeholder to have access to a smartphone that
supports the software. As older operating systems often don’t support modern
frameworks, we estimate that the user’s software must be less than five years
old for the application to perform optimally.

In terms of technology, our intervention has minimal requirements — all the
functionality can be achieved with a simple backend cloud service, such as
Firebase or AWS, that has real-time database features.

## Limitations

Though respondents to our survey and participants in our usability testing found
the intervention useful, there is further room for improvement in our design
space. We only prototyped a small portion of our intervention, which, like users
mentioned in section 5.2, could be tedious to enter data into manually. Thus,
further explorations could include automatic tracking and scanning as the user
loads items into their fridge and cabinets. However, with the current technology
available on the market, integrating such features would marginalize many of our
stakeholder groups, who cannot afford fancy smart fridges and cameras to scan
and track these items. We hope that, as technology advances, these small
conveniences will become more accessible to populations who need to share
kitchen spaces with peers.

## BONUS: Speculative Design for 2123 A.D.

### Scenario One

![Illustration of food in gelatin fridge](/img/posts/itemize/13.png)

Food goes into a gelatin-like substance with microscopic probes that detect the
safety of food through chemical changes. This yogurt is still good to go despite
being three days past its expiration date! But, unfortunately, the pasta that
you accidentally left on the counter overnight and chucked in the fridge hoping
to salvage it is beyond saving. Better throw it out soon, it’s not safe to eat.

### Scenario Two

![Illustration of person in front of sci-fi fridge](/img/posts/itemize/14.png)

Miranda opens the fridge in the middle of the night and finds that the midnight
snack she was looking for has gone bad while she was sleeping! Oh well, better
to go back to sleep hungry than wake up with a horrible stomach bug. She could
have checked the Itemize app to see which foods were in the fridge and safe to
eat, since the probes and fridge are connected to the database which refreshes
live through the mobile application, but frankly, the thought didn’t cross her
sleep-hazed mind. Good thing the gelatin fridge also has visual cues to indicate
whether food has gone bad, otherwise, she would have just grabbed it and eaten
it without a second thought.

## References & Attributions

Project created with Eric Xue and Logan Hosoda for the University of Washington
course _INFO 360: Design Methods_.

- Clifford, Dawn, et al. “Good Grubbin': Impact of a TV Cooking Show for College
  Students Living Off Campus.” Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior, vol.
  41, no. 3, 2009, pp. 194–200,
  https://www.jneb.org/article/S1499-4046(08)00010-9/fulltext. Accessed 8
  Apr. 2023.
- Graff, Sarah R., and Enrique Rodríguez-Alegría, editors. The Menial Art of
  Cooking: Archaeological Studies of Cooking and Food Preparation. University
  Press of Colorado, 2012.
- “Kitchen Definition: 361 Samples.” Law Insider,
  https://www.lawinsider.com/dictionary/kitchen. Accessed 8 April 2023.
- Méjean, C., Si Hassen, W., Gojard, S., Ducrot, P., Lampuré, A., Brug, H.,
  Lien, N., Nicolaou, M., Holdsworth, M., Terragni, L., Hercberg, S., &
  Castetbon, K. (2017). Social disparities in food preparation behaviours: A
  DEDIPAC study. Nutrition Journal, 16, 62.
  https://doi.org/10.1186/s12937-017-0281-2
- Paay, Jeni, et al. “Connecting in the Kitchen: An Empirical Study of Physical
  Interactions while Cooking Together at Home.” CSCW '15: Proceedings of the
  18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing,
  2015, pp. 276–287, https://doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675194. Accessed 8
  Apr. 2023.
- Santrach, M. (2021, April 1). Why the Kitchen Sells the Home. Studio M Kitchen
  & Bath. https://studiom-kb.com/why-the-kitchen-sells-the-home/
- Shustack, C. (2023, March 1). New Report Shows Social Media Is Vastly
  Improving People’s Cooking Skills. The Daily Meal.
  https://www.thedailymeal.com/1214286/new-report-shows-social-media-is-vastly-improving-peoples-cooking-skills/
- Semper, Gottfried. The Four Elements of Architecture and Other Writings.
  Translated by Wolfgang Herrmann and Harry Francis Mallgrave, Cambridge
  University Press, 1989.
- USDA ERS - Food Away from Home. (n.d.). Retrieved April 9, 2023, from
  https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/food-choices-health/food-consumption-demand/food-away-from-home.aspx
- Willen, Rachel. “When Chefs Gather: How Pros Influence Home Cooks.” ABC News,
  2012,
  https://abcnews.go.com/blogs/lifestyle/2012/10/when-chefs-gather-how-pros-influence-home-cooks.
  Accessed 8 Apr. 2023.
- 2021 U.S. food-away-from-home spending 10 percent higher than pre-pandemic
  levels. (n.d.). Retrieved April 9, 2023, from
  http://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/chart-gallery/gallery/chart-detail/?chartId=58364
