---
title: 'Medieval Commentary and the Interactivity of Text'
date: '2024-02-24T00:00:00.000'
description:
  'This paper explores medieval reading culture, the materiality of medieval
  manuscripts, the purpose of glosses, their impact, and how they take shape
  today.'
tags: ['essay']
thumbnail: /img/posts/more-than-a-piece-of-paper/thumbnail.jpeg
---

“Midway upon the journey of our life / I found myself in a dark wilderness, /
for I had wandered from the straight and true” (Alighieri 1.1–3). What did the
great poet Dante mean by this enigmatic passage? For the modern audience,
footnotes, appendices, and glossaries help guide our reading. Though Dante did
not tell us what he meant himself, we can thank medieval manuscript commentators
for laying the foundation for the rich interpretations we study today. Dante’s
_Divine Comedy_ is an epic poem composed in the Italian vernacular in the early
14th century. In it, Dante traverses Hell and Purgatory with the help of his
guide, the Roman poet Virgil, and Paradise with his lover, Beatrice. As a
widely-circulated medieval classic, the analysis found in its margins can serve
as a gateway to understanding the broader tradition of literary commentary. This
paper explores medieval reading culture, the materiality of medieval
manuscripts, the purpose of glosses, their impact, and how they take shape
today.

The verses of the _Divine Comedy_’s first canticle, _Inferno_, provide insight
into popular medieval reading culture. In Canto Five, Dante and his guide,
Virgil, meet the characters Francesca and Paolo in the second circle of Hell
reserved for the lustful. When Dante requests to hear the story of their
perdition, Francesca explains that she and Paolo “were reading for delight” when
they succumbed to their desire for one another (Alighieri 5.128). This short
passage highlights the reading culture of Dante’s time — by the 14th century,
people had already begun to read for pleasure beyond religion and
record-keeping. Though they were not historically significant figures, Francesca
and Paolo were city leaders, which contributed to their social and economic
privileges of being able to read for leisure. Dante shares that there were four
methods of interpreting literature in Medieval traditions — literal,
metaphorical, moral, and allegorical — in a letter to his patron, Cangrande
della Scala. Dante composed his work in line with these interpretative layers,
and the glosses of medieval commentators allow us to better understand the
depths of his arguments in the context of his time (Arduini, 2023).

There are no surviving manuscripts in Dante’s hand — scholars believe that he
dictated his work to scribes. Manuscript books were individually commissioned
and expensive, as parchment was made from untanned animal hides and manual
copying took extensive amounts of time. The oldest surviving manuscript of the
_Comedy_ dates between 1333 and 1345 and includes glosses written by Dante’s
son, Jacopo Alighieri (see Figure 1). These commentaries in the margins of the
manuscript offer a provide interpretive guidance into Dante’s poetic
intricacies. Through his annotations, Jacopo shares his interpretation of his
father's work with the world, contributing to the ongoing dialogue surrounding
Dante's _Commedia_ and providing valuable political, cultural, and historical
context (Arduini, 2023).

![Manuscript for the Divine Comedy](/img/posts/more-than-a-piece-of-paper/image1.png)

Figure 1. Page from an original _Divine Comedy_ manuscript. From “Dante's Divine
Comedy and the Complutensian Polyglot Bible (1514)” by Francis T. Conserette,
_The Harry and Jeanette Weinberg Memorial Library_, 22 March 2017,
https://sites.scranton.edu/library/2017/03/22/dantes-divine-comedy-and-the-complutensian-polyglot-bible-1514/.

To better understand the significance of glosses and how they shaped the
literary landscape, we must travel back in time to examine the evolution of
medieval literary culture and commentary on the Bible. To reach the form of
books we are familiar with today, civilizations iterated from clay tablets and
papyrus rolls to codices. Medieval glosses were mostly found in parchment
codices, as it was the only material readily available in Europe at the time
(Kilgour). Following the codex’s inception, the majority of people working with
written text were members of the clergy, and around a third of early codices
found before 400 A.D. were Biblical texts (Kilgour 54). The new format
facilitated information retrieval and allowed them to supplement religious
discourse with written sources. Reading and writing were initially a religious
and scholarly undertaking in Europe due to the scarce resources they demanded.
But as literacy became widespread and silent reading became popular, the domain
of readership also began to expand to privileged lay people. For example,
through the _pecia_ system, stationers rented books to students to make their
own copies, rendering books more available (Taylor).

Members of the clergy initially developed glosses to annotate the Bible.
Glosses, which began as brief notes consisting of a few words, evolved into full
commentaries over time (Cengage). As they developed, the layout of books also
changed to accommodate their robustness. Scribes wrote glosses in the margins
surrounding the main two-column text (Taylor). Their expansion dictated the
amount of main text present on the page, often aligning with marks like our
modern paragraph symbol (¶) for easy identification (Copeland). The visual
hierarchy of glosses was established through font and size variations, crucial
for managing the density of information on the pages. At times, they even
overflowed onto the following pages, leading to the development of tie-marks to
indicate “where the gloss stopped on one page and where it continued on the
next.” Cristian Ispir, a medieval and Latin scholar, compares glosses and
tie-marks to modern internet hypertexts and hyperlinks. They enabled readers to
access a wealth of information without leaving the page and also served as handy
location indicators (Ispir). By the time the most notable example, the _Glossa
ordinaria_, or the “standard gloss”, for the Bible was developed, scribes had
perfected the layout system for glosses in the margins of books (Copeland). Due
to its robustness, authority, and popularity, some even say that ​​“The Gloss,
in some sense, had become the Bible” (Taylor).

Clerical habits gradually expanded to “ever broadening circles of lay people”,
but their purpose remained the same — to educate (Taylor). Glosses enabled books
to become knowledgeable teachers, fully explaining their content to their most
faithful pupil, the reader. Professional readers existed to thoroughly
understand texts and transmit their knowledge to future readers through
annotations, cross-references, and catalogs. Interlinear glosses served to
clarify grammar and syntax, while prose commentary helped clarify allegorical
meanings, historical contexts, and allusions. There were two main types of prose
glosses: those written directly on the manuscript along with the author’s
original text and freestanding lemmatic commentary that used “the word or group
of words from the original text that is quoted to refer back to the passage
under consideration” (Copeland). Manuscript glosses resemble footnotes in
today’s printed books, while freestanding lemmatic commentary more closely
resembles book review and critique articles. However, they often bled into one
another. Some scribes or commentators would copy freestanding commentary into
the margins of their manuscripts, while others compiled margin commentary into
freestanding works. Explicitly, these glosses tell us about widely accepted
interpretations of literature, while implicitly, they tell a story about the
culture, reception, and experience of texts. Glosses added depth to literary
interpretations that would not be possible without the knowledge of the
commentators and uncovered a diverse network of contemporary influences,
inspirations, and connections.

Yet, the tradition of adding commentary to manuscripts sometimes leads to
interpolation issues where annotations or additions are mistaken as part of the
original work. For example, Servius, a well-known commentator of Virgil’s
_Aeneid_, cites an awkward and repetitive episode about Helen of Troy as a
separate text. Yet the Helen Episode appears in late-medieval manuscripts of the
work, indicating some confusion in the transcription process. In another
instance, Zanobi da Strada inserts a “dirty supplement” to Apuleius’ novel,
_Metamorphoses_, involving a mature woman and a donkey (Rota). Because
transcription is not standardized, people edited and “corrected” texts based on
their own opinions, knowledge, and cross-examinations (or, in some cases, their
idiosyncratic senses of humor). While these errors do not change the meaning of
the texts, they highlight the fluidity of manuscripts, the written tradition,
and the challenges for modern scholars studying them.

Remnants of manuscript commentary prevail today. Many books we read, including
Dante’s _Inferno_, include a robust table of contents, appendices, footnotes,
margins, editor’s notes, prefaces, introductions, and so on. These parts
originate from medieval traditions that initially allowed the clergy to easily
reference religious texts and sources. Introductions and prefaces model
freestanding lemmatic commentary, while footnotes parallel the glosses in the
margins of manuscripts. As media forms expand, so does the landscape of
annotation. Multimedia platforms offer new avenues for interactive engagement
with texts, where hyperlinks, embedded videos, and interactive graphics serve as
modern equivalents of medieval glosses. Furthermore, the democratization of
education has led to a proliferation of creative forms of annotation — online
forums, social media platforms, and digital annotation tools enabling readers
from diverse backgrounds to discuss their insights and interpretations. And, as
print books have become cheap and accessible, who could forget the good old
practice of writing in the margins of a favorite (non-library) book? This
democratization has not only expanded access to knowledge but has also enriched
the discourse surrounding texts, fostering a collaborative and dynamic approach
to literary analysis that echoes and amplifies the spirit of medieval commentary
traditions.

The examination of medieval manuscript culture and the tradition of glosses
reveals not only the materiality of literary works but also the layers of
interpretation that have shaped our understanding of texts like the _Divine
Comedy_. Glosses and commentary give us a glimpse of medieval reading practices,
intellectual landscape, and educational methods, highlighting the fluid nature
of human ideas peeking through the static impression of written language. The
authors may be dead, but their ideas live through their words. The tradition of
annotated books and marginalia marks the ongoing conversation between the
author, scholars, readers, and the world.

## Works Cited

- Alighieri, Dante. _Inferno_. Edited by Anthony Esolen, translated by Anthony
  Esolen, Random House Publishing Group, 2002.
- Arduini, Beatrice. “Dante's Divine Comedy.” Lectures, _ITAL 262_, Fall 2023,
  University of Washington.
- Cengage. “Glosses, Biblical.” _Encyclopedia.com_,
  https://www.encyclopedia.com/religion/encyclopedias-almanacs-transcripts-and-maps/glosses-biblical.
  Accessed 10 February 2024.
- Conserette, Francis T. “Dante's Divine Comedy and the Complutensian Polyglot
  Bible (1514).” _The Harry and Jeanette Weinberg Memorial Library_, 22 March
  2017,
  https://sites.scranton.edu/library/2017/03/22/dantes-divine-comedy-and-the-complutensian-polyglot-bible-1514/.
  Accessed 10 February 2024.
- Copeland, Rita. "Gloss and Commentary." Edited by Ralph Hexter and David
  Townsend, The Oxford Handbook of Medieval Latin Literature, Oxford Handbooks,
  2012, https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195394016.013.0009. Accessed 10
  Feb. 2024.
- Ispir, Cristian. “Glossed Bibles, Hypertexts and Hyperlinks.” _Medieval
  Manuscripts Blog_, 29 January 2018,
  https://blogs.bl.uk/digitisedmanuscripts/2018/01/glossed-bibles-hypertexts-and-hyperlinks.html.
  Accessed 10 February 2024.
- Janes, Joseph. “The Record of Us All.” Lecture, _INFO 357_, 7 February 2024,
  University of Washington.
- Kilgour, Frederick G. The Evolution of the Book. Oxford University
  Press, 1998.
- Rota, Gabriele. “Classics in Slices: Scattered Thoughts on
  Interpolation-Criticism.” _Antigone_, 25 June 2022,
  https://antigonejournal.com/2022/06/interpolation-criticism-latin/. Accessed
  10 February 2024.
- Taylor, Andrew. "Readers and Manuscripts." Edited by Ralph Hexter and David
  Townsend, The Oxford Handbook of Medieval Latin Literature, Oxford Handbooks,
  2012, https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195394016.013.0008. Accessed 10
  Feb. 2024.

## Attributions

- Photo by
  [Krisztina Papp](https://unsplash.com/@almapapi?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash)
  on Unsplash
