---
title: 'The Necessity of Simplicity-Revealing Vulnerability in Love'
date: '2024-06-06T00:00:00.000'
description:
  'In The Unbearable Lightness of Being, Kundera designs the dynamics between characters to demonstrate love as
inevitable in the face of simplicity-revealing vulnerability.'
tags: ['featured', 'literature', 'essay']
thumbnail: /img/posts/simple-vulnerability/thumbnail.jpeg
---

Milan Kundera’s novel _The Unbearable Lightness of Being_ explores themes of
love, existentialism, and power dynamics through the stories of four characters:
Tereza, Tomas, Sabina, and Franz. Throughout the narrative, Kundera repeats
motifs of childlikeness and kitsch, especially when talking about love. His
ideas surrounding these topics seem similar to poet Friedrich Schiller’s
perspective in his essay “On Simple and Sentimental Poetry”. Using Schiller’s
essay as a frame of reference, I will examine how Kundera describes love in the
relationships between both people and animals to identify the relationship
between love, simplicity, and kitsch. In _The Unbearable Lightness of Being_,
Kundera designs the dynamics between characters to explore the nuances of power,
relationships, and love. By doing so, he ultimately demonstrates love as
inevitable in the face of simplicity-revealing vulnerability.

In “On Simple and Sentimental Poetry”, Schiller first unpacks why we are
captivated by nature, then categorizes poets as either simple or sentimental. He
argues that our reverence for nature is not due to the aesthetic pleasure it
brings, but rather the moral pleasure stemming from nature being “the image of
our highest perfection in the ideal world”. He goes on to state, “The very
feature that constitutes their character is precisely what is lacking in ours to
make it complete” (181). However, this interest in nature is only possible in a
“moral soul” which is capable of ideas. It is the ideas that objects close to us
evoke “which, causing us to look closer into ourselves, show us more clearly
what in us departs from nature” (182). Children are a prime example of this
phenomenon, as their purity and closeness with nature leave us in awe of "the
contrast between their natural character and what is artificial in us" (183). He
calls this state of nature _simple_ (as opposed to _art_, or artifice). As such,
the simple poet is nature, while the sentimental poet seeks nature (194). Though
Schiller’s essay addresses simplicity and artifice in terms of poets (and, more
broadly, people), morals, and emotions, his philosophical arguments can also be
applied to love as well.

Already viewing his 1795 society as an “artificial age”, Schiller presents a
pessimistic view of the world in his essay (194). He states, “As soon as nature
gradually vanishes from human life—that is, in proportion as it ceases to be
experienced as a subject (active and passive)—we see it dawn and increase in the
poetical world in the guise of an idea and as an object” (191). Schiller’s
“poetical world” refers to poetry’s legacy and its space in society, but we can
narrow this scope to an individual’s poetical world, too, or, as Kundera puts
it, their “poetic memory”. In _The Unbearable Lightness of Being_, Kundera
postulates that “The brain appears to possess a special area which we might call
_poetic memory_ and which records everything that charms or touches us, that
makes our lives beautiful,” just as nature charms and touches us through its
sublimity (208). He then says, “Love begins with a metaphor. Which is to say,
love begins at the point when a woman enters her first word into our poetic
memory” (209). Love enters one’s poetic memory as nature enters poetry as an
idea and object. From this perspective, love and nature share the same qualities
of simplicity that make them worthy of being held dear in a poetic world,
whether societal or personal.

Schiller clearly delineates the scope of “nature” early in his essay, stating
that the “love and respectful emotion” brought on by it is “often elicited when
nature is considered in her plants, in her mineral kingdom, in rural districts;
also in the case of human nature, in the case of children, and in the manner of
country people and of the primitive races” (180). In other words, the nature he
talks about is that which is free from the corrupting influence of his
artificial society. However, since Kundera’s work is a novel exploring different
characters’ perspectives and experiences, the definition of love is not as
clear-cut, especially since it does not adhere to societal conventions. To
uncover Kundera’s implicit perspective, I will first present a synthesis of some
characters’ explicit mentions of love. Then I will dive into Tereza’s
relationships to highlight the nuances of love and its connection to simplicity
and sentimentality.

The narrative in _The Unbearable Lightness of Being_ begins with the origin
story for Tomas and Tereza’s relationship. Though Tomas is a libertine and
initially views Tereza as no more than a fling, she comes down with the flu when
visiting him and is stuck weak and feverish in his bed. Kundera, as the
narrator, says of his situation, “What could it have been if not love declaring
itself to him?” (7). He thinks of her as a child sent to him in a bulrush basket
and feels an “inexplicable love” toward Tereza because “she seemed a child to
him” (6). She ends up staying over at Tomas’s place, something he never does
with his mistresses, and Kundera observes that “Love does not make itself felt
in the desire for copulation (a desire that extends to an infinite number of
women) but in the desire for shared sleep (a desire limited to one woman)” (15).
Tereza is weak with her illness, and sleep is a state of defenselessness. When
facing this situation, Tomas cannot help but feel what he thinks could be love.
Since it declares itself to him, the feeling does not arise of his own volition.
Love, then, is inevitable in the face of vulnerability.

Though not explicitly stated, Kundera consistently repeats this sentiment of
vulnerability being necessary for love. Vulnerability is necessary mutually, for
the person falling in love, and for a person to be loved. In Franz and Sabina’s
relationship, Franz says “love means renouncing strength” (112). Though they had
differing definitions for all aspects of their life, Kundera speculates that,
had they more time or different circumstances, “Gradually, timorously, their
vocabularies would have come together, like bashful lovers, and the music of one
would have begun to intersect with the music of the other” (124). They could
have fallen in love and understood each other if they had renounced the strength
of their egos and let down their defenses to allow their music to intersect, if
they had been vulnerable with one another.

When having a casual affair with a stranger, Tereza “tried to withstand the
strong desire to burst out crying in his presence. She knew that her failure to
withstand it would have ruinous consequences. She would fall in love with him”
(157). This moment underscores the idea that vulnerability is a powerful and
involuntary trigger for love. Tereza's instinctive reaction to cry in front of
the stranger highlights her innate desire to express authentic emotions despite
the potential consequences. By doing so, Kundera suggests that love can arise
from moments of intense emotional exposure. Thus, being fully vulnerable in
front of another is enough to cause the sparks of love.

Finally, later in her life, Tereza dreams that Tomas becomes a rabbit,
symbolizing his lack of strength as he ages. At this point, he has moved to the
countryside for her and lost everything he had in the city, including the erotic
friendships he so loves. When Tereza apologizes for taking advantage of him by
leveraging her weakness, he says, “Haven’t you noticed I’ve been happy here,
Tereza?” The two dance together on a dance floor in a hotel bar, content in
their old age and relationship (313). Tereza is always jealous and anxious about
Tomas’s erotic affairs with other women, and thus cannot be fully comfortable in
his presence no matter how much she loves him. And it is questionable how much
she really does, as “she was _obliged_ to behave lovingly because she needed
him” (289). However, once the power dynamics between them break down, Tereza can
finally love Tomas with no reservations because of his vulnerability. Her wish
from their conflict in Switzerland finally comes true: he becomes an old man,
weak before her. His essence is completely now completely bare. Since
vulnerability is weakness, defenselessness, and transparency, it reveals one’s
unembellished, essential nature. Simplicity (the simple poet, or lover, _is_
nature), then, even if only before one person, is necessary for love, and real
love is necessarily simple.

Tereza, the child in the bulrush basket, is the perfect embodiment of a simple
lover’s dynamic evolution. Throughout the novel, she first falls from
simplicity, then becomes sentimental, and finally returns to simplicity before
her death. Her melancholic sentimentality in her complex situation mirrors
Schiller’s pessimism toward the survival of simplicity in a society of artifice.
In his essay, he writes,

> The poets of this order,—the genuinely simple poets, are scarcely any longer
> in their place in this artificial age. Accordingly they are scarcely possible
> in it, or at least they are only possible on the condition of traversing their
> age, like scared persons, at a running pace, and of being preserved by a happy
> star from the influence of their age, which would mutilate their genius. (194)

There is no place for simplicity in modernity. That which is simple quickly gets
corrupted by its surroundings. For Schiller’s simple poet, the surrounding is an
artificial society. For Tereza, it is her incompatibility with Tomas despite
their mutually proclaimed love.

Tereza begins as a symbol of simplicity but quickly loses this trait as her
relationship with Tomas progresses. Tomas initially attracts Tereza because,
when he “called out to her in a kind voice”, she “felt her soul rushing up to
the surface through her blood vessels and pores to show itself to him” (48). Due
to her traumatic experience with her mother’s exhibitionism and crudeness, she
longs for someone who would see her soul to differentiate her body from other
bodies (58). Yet, to Tomas, all bodies are the same, and he is “genuinely
incapable of abandoning his erotic friendships” (21). This destroys Tereza and
dissolves her hopes. She screams during intercourse with him, where “What was
screaming in fact was the naïve idealism of her love trying to banish all
contradictions, banish the duality of body and soul, banish perhaps even time”
(54). There is a rift in their perspectives: Tereza wants her soul to shine
through her body, while Tomas views body and soul as separate. He loves Tereza’s
soul, but Tereza wants to be loved in totality. Her love’s naïve, or simple,
idealism screams out its final breath (other English versions of Schiller’s
essay translate “simple” as “naïve”). The contradictions she experiences are the
overturning force knocking her from her flying vessel of naïve hope and into a
state of a perpetual fall.

As Schiller observes, “Simplicity in our mode of thinking brings with it of
necessity simplicity in our mode of expression, simplicity in terms as well as
movement; and it is in this that grace especially consists” (187). Yet, after
discovering Tomas’s unfaithfulness, Tereza’s “gestures grew abrupt and
unsteady”, implying that her movements had been smooth and graceful before,
further highlighting her initially simple nature outside of Tomas’s perception.
After becoming entangled with Tomas, “There was no way out” for her (21). This
admission and acceptance of the tragic situation is a good representation of her
melancholy, which colors the tone of her sentimentality.

After becoming disillusioned with her and Tomas’s relationship, Tereza becomes
sentimental and, instead of _being_ nature, _seeks_ nature instead through her
relationship with Karenin, her and Tomas’s dog. Karenin, as an animal, is simple
and pure, and Kundera explicitly portrays him as so when he wakes up every
morning with “a naïve and simple amazement” at existence (132). She loves
Karenin wholly and unconditionally. “True human goodness, in all its purity and
freedom, can come to the fore only when its recipient has no power,” Kundra
writes, again highlighting the necessity of simplicity-revealing vulnerability
in love (289). Karenin becomes Tereza’s anchor to replace her lost simplicity
and wonder. Tereza seeks nature by loving him.

If Tereza represents evolving simplicity, then Tomas represents the subject
experiencing her simplicity in his poetical world. As Schiller mentions, nature
can only exist as an object in a poetical world, and no longer as an active or
passive subject, as it vanishes in society. Tomas is by no means simple. He is
described as a strong and independent libertine, and his character does not
experience Tereza’s initial level of simplicity as a subject. He is instead
pessimistic and cynical, concluding “that the love story of his life exemplified
not ‘_Es muss sein!_’ (It must be so), but rather ‘_Es könnte auch anders sein_’
(It could just as well be otherwise)” (35). His character and perspective make
his love for Tereza sentimental, as he is aware of how his decadent behavior
contrasts with Tereza’s naïve goodness yet is unable to change despite knowing
how much it hurts her (21). Her simplicity highlights his own impurity, and he
loves her for it. However, as Tereza loses her childlikeness, his sentimental
love no longer has a basis, and thus Tereza dreams that he sends her to die — in
her fallen state, she is no longer lovable to him (146–151).

As described earlier, Tereza is able to love Tomas after he becomes weak, and
they live a simple, rural life on a collective farm. Miraculously, years after
Tereza’s fall and loss of child-like charm, Tomas finally embodies the same
simplicity-revealing vulnerability that Karenin represents by becoming a rabbit
in Tereza’s mind. Thus, her character comes full circle, and she returns to
simplicity, if only briefly, before she and Tomas die in a car accident driving
home. This moment becomes the eternity of love that they had been seeking their
whole lives with each other, as both simple lovers’ natures finally align.

Tereza and Tomas’s relationship, as well as Kundera’s observations as the
narrator, reveal that real love corresponds to Schiller’s simplicity of nature.
Then, Schiller’s artifice corresponds to Kundera’s descriptions of kitsch in the
novel. When introducing the term, Kundera defines it as so:

> ’Kitsch’ is a German word born in the middle of the sentimental nineteenth
> century, and from German it entered all Western languages. Repeated use,
> however, has obliterated its original metaphysical meaning: kitsch is the
> absolute denial of shit, in both the literal and the figurative senses of the
> word; kitsch excludes everything from its purview which is essentially
> unacceptable in human experience. (248)

In other words, kitsch distills the human experience into something artificially
palatable by deeming natural bodily functions as crude and unacceptable — it is
the epitome of artifice.

However, this conception of kitsch introduces tension into the theory that real
love is simple. Kundra states that “The identity of kitsch comes not from a
political strategy but from images, metaphors, and vocabulary” (261). So, is
love also kitsch, then, given Tomas falls in love with Tereza because of a
metaphor? And if it is kitsch, or artificial, how can it also be simple? To
reconcile such a contradiction, I propose that the experiences surrounding love
can be separated from the experience of love itself. Experiences adjacent to
love can be kitsch, but the essence of love is simple — the feeling itself is
simple. The kitsch of a metaphor is transformed into nature the moment it enters
the poetic memory, much like how “In the sunset of dissolution, everything is
illuminated by the aura of nostalgia, even the guillotine” (Kundera 4). Once an
event or thought passes, it gains a new nostalgic identity. The metaphor is no
longer experienced as a subject, but as an object for the sentimental lover, or
Tomas.

While Schiller views artifice as negative in his essay, Kundera maintains a
neutral stance on kitsch. He condemns it using Sabina’s character but admits
that “none of us is superman enough to escape kitsch completely. No matter how
we scorn it, kitsch is an integral part of the human condition” (256). Though
kitsch is a corrupting force, it is also a necessary element of being human.
Tomas and Tereza fall into kitsch with their mutually repellent sentimentality,
Tomas’s metaphor, and Tereza’s abandonment of herself when she sleeps with the
anonymous engineer (154). However, once all the kitsch elements are removed in
their simple, rural life, the revealed essence of their love is ultimately
simple. Love in _The Unbearable Lightness of Being_ begins with kitsch but
transcends it in the end.

By following the growing pains of a simple love between Tereza and Tomas in _The
Unbearable Lightness of Being_, Kundera demonstrates that love is inevitable in
the face of simplicity-revealing vulnerability. Love is like nature because the
lover enters as an object in one’s poetic memory, much like how nature enters as
a sentimental object in the poetic world. This notion is especially prominent in
the novel, as Kundera frames vulnerability and weakness as necessary for love,
for it reveals one’s nature. Though moments of Tereza and Tomas’s relationship
can be viewed as kitsch and artificial, the essence of their love remains
simple. They finally end their lives with a healthy love as they both love in
alignment with the other – they become weak together, and thus, happy.

## Works Cited

- Kundera, Milan. The Unbearable Lightness of Being. Translated by Michael Henry
  Heim, Harper & Row, Publishers, Inc., 1984.
- Schiller, Friedrich. “On Simple and Sentimental Poetry.” Aesthetical and
  Philosophical Essays, Anodos Books, 2017, pp. 180–195.
- Photo by
  [Evie S.](https://unsplash.com/@evieshaffer?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash)
  on
  [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/photos/closeup-photo-of-white-leaves-Sw7f58YJbc0?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash)
